pages/docs/compute-cluster/ssh.mdx, before:

# SSH

Now that you have access to the WATcloud compute cluster (Don't have access yet? Make a request [here](./getting-access)),
you can use SSH[^ssh] to connect to the cluster.

[^ssh]: SSH stands for Secure Shell. It is a protocol that allows you to connect to a remote machine and execute commands on it.
Learn more about SSH [here](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/access-management/what-is-ssh/).

## Quick Start

Here's a tool to help you generate a personalized SSH command. This tool will generate a command that you can copy and paste into your terminal.
Note that the commands generated by this tool are only tested on Linux and macOS.

### Command Generator

Choose your preferred machine and entrypoint[^entrypoint] below. Your personalized SSH command will be generated and displayed below.

[^entrypoint]: An entrypoint is a service or location that you connect to or be at when you connect to the cluster. This is necessary
because the cluster is behind a [firewall](./firewall) and you cannot connect to it directly.

import { SSHCommandGenerator } from '@/components/ssh-command-generator'
import { Separator } from "@/components/ui/separator"

<Separator className="mt-6" />

<div className="mt-6">
    <SSHCommandGenerator />
</div>

<Separator className="mt-6" />

The generated commands do *not* require setting up ssh agent[^ssh-agent] or ssh config[^ssh-config].
However, you may soon find that setting them up will make your life easier. If you are interested in learning more about these
tools, please check out [Tips and Tricks](#tips-and-tricks) and the official documentation linked in the footnotes.

[^ssh-agent]: [SSH agent](https://www.ssh.com/ssh/agent) is a program that runs in the background and stores your SSH keys.
It comes with neat features like [SSH agent forwarding](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/using-ssh-agent-forwarding)
that allows you to use your local SSH keys on remote machines.

[^ssh-config]: [SSH config](https://www.ssh.com/ssh/config/) is a configuration file that allows you to simplify your SSH commands.

## Syntax

The general syntax for connecting to the cluster is:

```bash copy
SSH_KEY_PATH="<path_to_ssh_key>"
SSH_USERNAME="<username>"
SSH_HOST="<hostname>"
ssh -v -i "$SSH_KEY_PATH" "$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_HOST"
```

or if you are using a jump host:

```bash copy
SSH_KEY_PATH="<path_to_ssh_key>"
SSH_USERNAME="<username>"
SSH_HOST="<hostname>"
SSH_JUMP_HOST="<jump_host>"
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p -i \"$SSH_KEY_PATH\" \"$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_JUMP_HOST\"" -i "$SSH_KEY_PATH" "$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_HOST"
```

## Tips and Tricks

### Additional SSH Keys

To use additional SSH keys, you have the following options:

1. [Update your profile](../utilities/profile-editor) to add additional SSH keys.
2. Manually create `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` and place your SSH keys in there.You'll
need to make sure that this file is present in all machines that you want to connect to[^authorized_keys_note].

[^authorized_keys_note]: For example, if you use Bastion to connect to the cluster, you'll need to make sure that
`~/.ssh/authorized_keys` is present on both Bastion and the machine you intend to connect to.

### SSH Agent

SSH agent is useful for many reasons, for example:
1. It removes the need to use the `-i` flag to specify the path to your SSH key.
2. It allows you to use [SSH agent forwarding](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/using-ssh-agent-forwarding).

You can use SSH agent as follows:

```bash copy
# Start an SSH agent if it's not already running
[[ -z "$SSH_AUTH_SOCK" ]] && eval "$(ssh-agent -s)"
# Add your SSH key to the agent. Replace ~/.ssh/id_rsa with the path to your SSH key.
ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa
# Connect to the cluster
ssh -v "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>" # This is the same as ssh -v -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>" without SSH agent
# or if you are using a jump host
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p \"<ssh_username>@<ssh_jump_host>\"" "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>"
```

### `~/.ssh/config`

If you find yourself using the same SSH command over and over again, you can use `~/.ssh/config` to simplify your life.

For example, if you find yourself using the following command often:

```bash copy
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p -i \"<ssh_key_path>\" \"<ssh_username>@<ssh_jump_host>\"" -i "<ssh_key_path>" "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>"
```

you can add the following to your `~/.ssh/config`:

```ssh-config copy
Host <ssh_jump_host>
    HostName <ssh_jump_host>
    User <ssh_username>
    IdentityFile <ssh_key_path>

Host <ssh_host>
    HostName <ssh_host>
    User <ssh_username>
    IdentityFile <ssh_key_path>
    ProxyJump <ssh_jump_host>
```

and then simply run:

```bash copy
ssh -v <ssh_host>
```

A real-world example of this is:

```ssh-config copy
Host bastion
    HostName bastion.watonomous.ca
    User alex
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa

Host derek3-ubuntu2
    HostName derek3-ubuntu2.cluster.watonomous.ca
    User alex
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa
    ProxyJump bastion
```

```bash copy
ssh -v derek3-ubuntu2
```


{
// Separate footnotes from the main content
}
<Separator className="mt-6" />

Commit message:

Made registering to watcloud more clear. Also guiding people to tips and tricks more.

pages/docs/compute-cluster/ssh.mdx, after:

# SSH

SSH stands for Secure Shell. It is a commonly used protocol that allows you to connect to a remote machine and execute commands on it.
Learn more about SSH [here](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/access-management/what-is-ssh/).

<Callout type="warning">
Before proceeding, make sure that you are a registered user of the WATcloud compute cluster. Not registered? Make a request [here](./getting-access)).
</Callout>

## Quick Start

Here's a tool to help you generate a personalized SSH command. This tool will generate a command that you can copy and paste into your terminal.
Note that the commands generated by this tool are only tested on Linux and macOS. We highly recommend you take a look at the [Tips and Tricks](#tips-and-tricks) section if you are looking
to use the cluster regularly. It will save time :).

### Command Generator

Choose your preferred machine and entrypoint[^entrypoint] below. Your personalized SSH command will be generated and displayed below.

[^entrypoint]: An entrypoint is a service or location that you connect to or be at when you connect to the cluster. This is necessary
because the cluster is behind a [firewall](./firewall) and you cannot connect to it directly.

import { SSHCommandGenerator } from '@/components/ssh-command-generator'
import { Separator } from "@/components/ui/separator"

<Separator className="mt-6" />

<div className="mt-6">
    <SSHCommandGenerator />
</div>

<Separator className="mt-6" />

The generated commands do *not* require setting up ssh agent[^ssh-agent] or ssh config[^ssh-config].
However, you may soon find that setting them up will make your life easier. If you are interested in learning more about these
tools, please check out [Tips and Tricks](#tips-and-tricks) and the official documentation linked in the footnotes.

[^ssh-agent]: [SSH agent](https://www.ssh.com/ssh/agent) is a program that runs in the background and stores your SSH keys.
It comes with neat features like [SSH agent forwarding](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/using-ssh-agent-forwarding)
that allows you to use your local SSH keys on remote machines.

[^ssh-config]: [SSH config](https://www.ssh.com/ssh/config/) is a configuration file that allows you to simplify your SSH commands.

## Syntax

The general syntax for connecting to the cluster is:

```bash copy
SSH_KEY_PATH="<path_to_ssh_key>"
SSH_USERNAME="<username>"
SSH_HOST="<hostname>"
ssh -v -i "$SSH_KEY_PATH" "$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_HOST"
```

or if you are using a jump host:

```bash copy
SSH_KEY_PATH="<path_to_ssh_key>"
SSH_USERNAME="<username>"
SSH_HOST="<hostname>"
SSH_JUMP_HOST="<jump_host>"
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p -i \"$SSH_KEY_PATH\" \"$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_JUMP_HOST\"" -i "$SSH_KEY_PATH" "$SSH_USERNAME@$SSH_HOST"
```

## Tips and Tricks

### Additional SSH Keys

To use additional SSH keys, you have the following options:

1. [Update your profile](../utilities/profile-editor) to add additional SSH keys.
2. Manually create `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` and place your SSH keys in there.You'll
need to make sure that this file is present in all machines that you want to connect to[^authorized_keys_note].

[^authorized_keys_note]: For example, if you use Bastion to connect to the cluster, you'll need to make sure that
`~/.ssh/authorized_keys` is present on both Bastion and the machine you intend to connect to.

### SSH Agent

SSH agent is useful for many reasons, for example:
1. It removes the need to use the `-i` flag to specify the path to your SSH key.
2. It allows you to use [SSH agent forwarding](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/using-ssh-agent-forwarding).

You can use SSH agent as follows:

```bash copy
# Start an SSH agent if it's not already running
[[ -z "$SSH_AUTH_SOCK" ]] && eval "$(ssh-agent -s)"
# Add your SSH key to the agent. Replace ~/.ssh/id_rsa with the path to your SSH key.
ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_rsa
# Connect to the cluster
ssh -v "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>" # This is the same as ssh -v -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>" without SSH agent
# or if you are using a jump host
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p \"<ssh_username>@<ssh_jump_host>\"" "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>"
```

### `~/.ssh/config`

If you find yourself using the same SSH command over and over again, you can use `~/.ssh/config` to simplify your life.

For example, if you find yourself using the following command often:

```bash copy
ssh -v -o ProxyCommand="ssh -W %h:%p -i \"<ssh_key_path>\" \"<ssh_username>@<ssh_jump_host>\"" -i "<ssh_key_path>" "<ssh_username>@<ssh_host>"
```

you can add the following to your `~/.ssh/config`:

```ssh-config copy
Host <ssh_jump_host>
    HostName <ssh_jump_host>
    User <ssh_username>
    IdentityFile <ssh_key_path>

Host <ssh_host>
    HostName <ssh_host>
    User <ssh_username>
    IdentityFile <ssh_key_path>
    ProxyJump <ssh_jump_host>
```

and then simply run:

```bash copy
ssh -v <ssh_host>
```

A real-world example of this is:

```ssh-config copy
Host bastion
    HostName bastion.watonomous.ca
    User alex
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa

Host derek3-ubuntu2
    HostName derek3-ubuntu2.cluster.watonomous.ca
    User alex
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa
    ProxyJump bastion
```

```bash copy
ssh -v derek3-ubuntu2
```


{
// Separate footnotes from the main content
}
<Separator className="mt-6" />
